## a friendly chickenâ€™s tale
### by Mason Loring Bliss

Outside? There is... outside.

There's light from outside. I see light.

I push at the barrier with my head. Nothing.

I hunch my shoulders, and force my beak at it. A line! A crack!

But as I push at it again, excited, it doesn't budge. I can barely move. I
need to get free, but the struggle is exhausting.

With a burst of energy and need, I drive my beak at it again. The crack
widens! I push hard with my head and the wall breaks more, and suddenly
part of it pushes out, and I see LIGHT!

I've never seen such light! It is almost too much and I stop to catch my
bearings and my breath.

Panting, I pull air deep into my lungs! I've never been able to fill my
lungs like this before.

Ready to try again, itching to be free, I push hard against the wall and as
it gives I keep pushing more. At the very end of my strength, my head
breaks through! The light...!

The light is too blindingly bright to see and my eyes squeeze shut.

But the sounds... I can hear things more clearly than ever before.

What I hear first and best is a soft, concerned clucking that immediately
fills me with a feeling of comfort and safety.

But then I hear other voices... Little voices peeping, and as I hear them I
am filled with the urge to call out to them.

I gather myself and sing out, and my voice is like theirs. We sing
together, and Mother's voice, for now I know that is the deeper, comforting
voice I've heard since before I could think, has a new tone, and suddenly I
feel her gentle beak caressing the back of my head.

I involuntarily open my eyes despite the light, and she is over me, and
nearby I see fuzzy yellow shapes, and they are the source of the peeping
chorus I've joined.

Further away a different being watches us and takes notes, nodding and
muttering. It is not like Mother. But, I sense no menace from the
long-muzzled, bespectacled animal.

* * *

School. There are a variety of other students. Some are like me, their
yellow baby fuzz transformed to pristine, snowy white feathers, but some
have replaced their fuzz with glossy black feathers, or rich red, or muted
orange.

I love my schoolmates. We learn together, reciting the alphabet and
learning math, learning the names of the many kinds of animals. We learn
about the CRISPR that made us able to think, and speak, and read and write,
and that makes us bigger and more capable than the animals that came before
us. I still have trouble holding my pen, but I'm working at it.

Most of us in my class are chickens, but there are some other birds with us
\- songbirds, smaller and more colourful than us; turkeys, bigger and
silly-looking but very dignified for all that. There is even a raven in our
class. When I first met him I was frightened of him, but his ready laugh
and the look of mischief in his eye as he tells a new joke quickly put an
end to that. In other classes there are other animals, all learning like we
are.

* * *

I love recess when the sun is shining, playing in the playground. On one
particularly warm day, I sneak off to the corner of the field and find a
warm, bare patch of dirt, and wriggle in, kicking dust and dirt up over my
feathers and letting the sun soak into my outstretch wings. I know I
shouldn't, but it feels so good!

A shadow falls over me, and I look up, blinking and apprehensive. Teacher
is standing over me, a look of stern disapproval on her face, and I am
filled with shame as she scolds me, saying it's ata... ata... atavistic. I
don't know what the word means, but I don't like to disappoint Teacher.
Head down, I slink back to the classroom, shaking the dust out of my
feathers as I go.

* * *

Teacher has a treat for us today. She sets down a big cardboard box and
opens the lid, and we gather around to peer inside.

What we see makes no sense. We've seen coconuts fall from the trees, but
what's in the box appear to be coconut shells cut in half, with straps
attached to the outsides.

Seeing our confusion, Teacher takes two of the shells and slips them onto
her wingtips. My jaw drops as she then neighs and claps the coconuts
together and prances a bit. It sounds just like a horsie running, just like
we saw on movie night!

Our eyes light up and we each take a pair, and soon the entire class is
clip-clopping and hopping around, laughing and neighing.

* * *

Today is a very special day, and we've been looking forward to it all week.
Our class is going to visit the Welcome Center! It is exciting beyond
words. We will see all sorts of people - even humans!

We walk in line, our teacher leading us, and we marvel at the animals in
their uniforms and costumes, and we can't stop staring at the humans. While
they have no fur or feathers, they adorn themselves with clothing in a
bewildering array of colours.

None of us have visited the Welcome Center before, as we spend our time in
the school compound. The sounds of the nearby ocean are mesmerizing - we
know from our geography lessons that we live on an island, but most of us
haven't seen the sea around us before. In fact, for most of us, including
me, it's our first time away from our daily routine, and it's very
exciting.

Our visit starts off at the SMoMA building, the Super Museum of Modern Art.
A tour guide leads us around the museum, telling us about the tools and
techniques used for each exhibit. The pictures are very grand and I lose
track of time gazing at them when our teacher tells us it's time for lunch.
I didn't realize how hungry I was! We line up and follow her out of the
museum, stopping briefly to admire the grand fountain in the middle of the
welcome center, and then we continue on to the Meet n' Eat where we gather
around the tables for lunch. But Teacher tells us the real treat is
waiting!

Waddling slightly, my crop comfortably full from my meal, I join my
schoolmates as we come out of the restaurant, and turn left at the
fountain. The ground is tiled with big stars, a couple feet across, and in
each is inscribed the name of a celebrity - musicians, inventors, even the
hosts of Super Animal Royale Tonight!

As we walk, a huge building emerges ahead of us. I've seen pictures of
this! It's our concert hall, the Super Animal Super Stage! Made of tan and
white stone blocks, it has ornate pillars at the front, trimmed in red and
gold, and there are red carpets leading past the ticket windows and into
the building. There's a marquee with lights hanging above the front, and my
heart beats faster with excitement.

Teacher tells us to hush as we approach a ticket window, and then as we
file inside my beak gapes with amazement and my steps slow. We've heard
music before, of course, on our little radios and in the school cafeteria,
but this was something else altogether! We walk into a large room filled
with seats - called an auditorium, I later learn - and file into rows of
seats on the right. There on the stage in the front of the room are a
variety of musicians. Among them, I recognize several animals from the
older grades, seated with their instruments. They're just warming up in
preparation for the concert, but it is like nothing I've ever heard or felt
before. I can feel the vibrations travel through me, and I am transported.

When the actual program starts, I forget where I am, my mind filled with
abstract images drawn by the music. The music tells a story without words,
and it's like we're on a journey through time and space without ever moving
from our seats.

I've completely lost track of time, but eventually the animals on stage
conclude their piece, and they all stand and take a bow together. The
audience rises and applauds. The animals on stage are smiling, and bow two
or three more times before filing off-stage. I sit back down, stunned and
amazed and feeling like the music has changed something deep inside of me.

Teacher motions us up and walks us around to the side of the stage, and
then back through a corridor deeper into the building. We pass a room with
tools for set contruction, a wardrobe room with rows of costumes hanging on
racks, a couple dressing rooms, and then past a closed door with music
audible behind it, finally finding ourselves in the last room off the
corridor, where some of the musicians have gather to talk to the students.

I recognize a friend, an older glossy black chicken who's going to graduate
this year and who plays the trombone, and I cluck with pleasure! He smiles
at me, and motions for me to follow him. I look at Teacher, and she nods
her approval. I follow my friend back out into the corridor, and he goes to
the closed door through which I heard music. He presses a button I hadn't
seen, and the door slides open on its own.

He leads me into a room packed full of strange and wonderful things -
there's a fancy, comfy chair with a low table next to it, a grand piano, a
large book-case filled with books, a Victrola, which finishes playing as we
walk in, and best of all, musical instruments! I am afraid to touch
anything, but my friend pushes me towards a stringed instrument - a guitar
\- and invites me to try it. My wingtip brushes a string, and it vibrates,
making a rich sound, and I am transfixed. I brush it again, stroking two
strings this time, and it makes a more complex sound. I can feel it
traveling up my feathers. I brush each string in turn, and each makes a
different sound. I look up at my friend and he watches me, smiling.

* * *

I am so nervous! I've practised long months, but what if I mess up? I've
played for friends before but never... I can't think about it. I grip my
guitar tight by the neck and close my eyes. But then the director's voice
intrudes, telling me that it's my turn. I'm glad for my feathers, and hope
they cover the hot blush spreading beneath them, but the director can see
it in my eyes. With a kindly smile, he tells me I'll do just fine, but I
have never been so nervous in all my life.

I walk out through the door and I can't see beyond the stage, the lights
being so bright, but I can hear the audience even if I can't see them. They
murmur to one another, shifting and talking quietly. When I step out onto
the stage and into the lights, the murmuring stops and a sound like the
surf at night sweeps over me, gentle applause which rises but then
subsides. Screwing up my courage, I walk to the center of the stage, smile
nervously at them, close my eyes, and begin.

Soon I forget where I am, and there is nothing but me and my guitar and the
vibrations as my wingtips coax the notes out of my beloved instrument.
There is only the melody, the perfect inevitability of the progression, one
note following the next as the music flows out through me. Far from effort,
it's like the music is playing both my guitar and me, and I'm carried along
with it through the rises and falls, until the achingly right, necessary
end note strums out through my wingtip, through the string, into the air,
and leaves the auditorium in complete silence. Then, like a great wave
hitting the shore, the audience roars its approval, standing and clapping
and cheering, and the sound rolls through me just as the music did earlier.

The house lights come up, but the cheering audience is a blur through the
tears of joy in my eyes.

* * *

I enjoy school quite a bit. I love reading stories of the first uplifted
animals, and we visit the labs where new kinds of animals are designed and
shaped based on traditional varieties. On our first visit, I'm startled to
meet Dr. Jennifer Dogna, the strange figure at the edge of memory that was
there the day I hatched. She tells us of her exciting new project, where
she'll be able to create super animals full-grown! She tells us there are
some variables she has to figure out, but that she's sure she can work out
the kinks. I can't even imagine what it would be to wake full-grown, my
head filled with knowledge I didn't have to learn in school. It's almost a
frightening idea, and I wonder about the problems Dr. Dogna still has to
resolve.

As much as I love learning things at school, my heart is with my
instrument, my guitar, and it is my constant companion when we have field
trips and campouts, where so often I'll sit by the fire strumming,
sometimes singing softly, as my friends sway and listen, their eyes closed
in pleasure. I've gotten used to performing on the Super Stage. Well, maybe
not quite used to it - but I'm not gripped with fear now. I only have small
butterflies in my stomach before going on-stage to perform.

* * *

I'm shocked out of sleep by a loud *boom* and I almost fall off my perch. I
squawk my distress and look around, and the other chickens in the coop are
equally startled and dismayed. Then another boom, closer, shakes the room,
and a sound like firecrackers, but deeper. Suddenly the door bursts open
and Teacher looks in. She has blood under one eye and on her comb and she
looks frightened. Her beak opens as if to speak, but then she chokes back a
sob and runs out again, leaving the door open.

I jump down off my sleeping perch and run out, but what I see freezes my
blood. The humans have been gone for some time now, even if no one will say
quite why, but the animals have always gotten along... until now. Now, as I
look out the door of our dormitory in the research lab, I hear screams and
more cracks and booms, and I see animals with what must be guns chasing
each other, and as often as not the painfully loud sound of an explosion is
matched by an animal falling and not moving any more. The Rebellion. I
didn't quite believe it was real, but I believe it now. I scrabble back
inside and shut the door.

* * *

I don't feel safe. The Rebellion feels like it's going to take us all, and
it doesn't seem to matter if we supported the park or not. We were all
caged, they say, and a new order is coming.

In whispers, a turkey friend tells me that he heard some people talking,
saying that the humans made us to fight each other and now they're gone,
and anyone who worked with them is going to pay. He thinks the safest thing
is to join the rebels, but I just don't know. They kill people!

Every day there are attacks, and each of us has lost friends. I still play
my guitar some as it calms my friends, and if I can take away their worry
for a time, I want to. The S.A.W. soldiers are holding their own, but the
fighting is brutal and frightening.

* * *

My eyes snap open in the dark. There's something not right, but I'm not
sure what. Then I realize that the door hangs open, and there's a shape
standing in the doorframe, backlit by the moonlight. It's... It's like a
chicken, but there's something wrong with it. It's hard to see in the dark,
but I think it's staring at me.

Without warning, it jumps at me, and I squawk with fear. My coop-mates all
start screaming with me and feathers fly about the coop, and the shape
barrels into me and knocks me to the floor. I can see now that it's a
chicken, but somehow a... wrong chicken. Its feathers are disheveled, and a
stench of rot almost overwhelms me as it pins me down. Its eyes look dead
and unfocused, even as it reaches down with its beak. I struggle to get
free, but then a terrible, ripping pain overwhelms me, such as I have never
felt. It's ripped me... torn into my stomach... and what I see as I look
down at its lifeless eyes and tearing beak is almost as horrible as the
pain that is so intense that my mind shuts down. I weakly try and fail to
squawk for help, but then, mercifully, I black out.

* * *

Pain. Dizziness. I want to throw up. I open my eyes but everything is dim
and mis-coloured, like a green slime is covering my eyes. I... think it's
daylight through the open door of the coop, but it's so hard to see, fuzzy,
indistinct. Where are my friends? Teacher?

I'm alone. A wrenching pain makes me double over and I fade into the black
again.

* * *

Awake again. Cold, and a pang of sharp hunger. I open my eyes, and the
world is full of mist. I try to blink, but the mist is still there, all
around me, a greenish miasma. My head hurts, filled with pressure. I cannot
think clearly.

I stagger to my feet and wander out through the door. So hungry, and I need
the comfort of my flock, my friends. Can't think. So hard... to think.

* * *

Limping, I hear booms of explosions around me, but don't care. Have to find
frens. Stomach hurts bad.

Campfire ahead! Frens. Warm... Need warm, need frens. Lonely. Scared. I get
close. "Fffrens..."

Frens jump up, shout, staring towards me, and I turn to see what behind me
that scares them. See nothing. Hear boom and feeling like ice pierces my
shoulder, and I can't feel wing. Turn and frens aiming guns at me. Guns!

I croak out, begging, "No!? No hurt!" but the sound that emerges... not
words. A flash from a gun and I feel a sharp jolt, and the world goes
black.

* * *

Riding. Riding forever. Hors under me, hooves clip clop, clip clop. Green
grass, field, trees pass. Hors fast, so fast. Hors beautiful. Hors my fren.

Wind whistles through my feathers. Clip clop, clip clop, riding. Field is
green, sky blue, white clouds. Hors good, clip clop, clip clop.

Then boom! I want to retch, pain hurts so bad. I am on my back, staring up
at the sky, convulsing, only grass gone. No grass, no clouds, just burning
sand under me.

I try call hors, help me, and I see shattered remains of coconut shell
strapped to my wing. They broke hors. World goes black.

* * *

Belly hurts, empty. So hungry. Bones on floor. Room. Need room. Find room.

Mist in eyes, so hard to see, but find room.

Gtar! I almost swoon. Wings not work right, but pick up gtar. Pain in head
as remember how...

Can't feel against belly, but wingtips make strings vibrate, and suddenly
all... is clear for a moment. The vibrations travel through my body. I
strum, and it comes back to me. The music lifts me. Friends! Play for my
flock, soothe them. Calm the flock. The guitar is the center of... The
center of... Pain in my head, haze... Gtar... Can't think. Can't see. Need
frens. Flock.

Drag gtar with me, out into night.

* * *

Wandering. Where frens?

At last, see chicken frens. Forest. Chickens damaged, feathers dirty, eyes
empty, limping. I lift gtar, play for them. Chicken frens stop and turn
heads, sway, listening.

But then other frens come. Raccoon, bat, peacock, more. Chicken frens see
and run to them, and then booms and many chickens fall. Chickens bite other
animals, bite clean chickens, bite dogs, bite rabbits. Chicken frens that
fell to booms stagger up again. Animals they bite also stagger up. They
hurting each other. I cry, "no kil!" but voice no work.

Must soothe. I play gtar, hope they calm, stop fite. Some stop, listen, but
booms and they fall. Red fox sees me and points gun, and I hear boom and
now on ground on back, and the world goes dim.

* * *

Loud boom. More booms. Many booms.

Limping, I follow booms. Lonely, and always animals at booms! Find frens.

See damaged chickens and other animals through smoke. Cats. A dog. Foxes.
Animal frens in clearing. Hurt chicken frens run at them, but fall with
booms. Some animals bited by chickens, fall.

Must soothe, make frens feel better. I play gtar. Not too close or they
shoot, but want soothe frens, like camping trips. Close eyes and play for
them.

Then, loud noise. Giant bird comes from sky. Has big cage clutched in
claws. Animal frens run to it, get in cage, then bird fly up. Just broken
chicken and animal frens on ground now, hardly moving. Bird's giant wings
so loud, sound like ocean wave on beach, like stage, like audience
applause, but fade as bird fly away.

Play gtar again, watching giant bird go. Frens gone. Maybe they come back
and listen around fire. Miss frens, miss school, miss what was. I cry but
eyes can't make tears. I lower head and close eyes, and play.

<em>Copyright 2024 by Mason Loring Bliss.</em>
